Sophie's Cafe

My project was inspired from my sister who has been starting up a coffee shop for a few months and I decided to create a website for her future coffee shop. I decided that the website should include at least the front page, menu and frequently asked questions. I decided to add the additional reviews page a couple of hours into making the website as I thought that it would just add an extra layer of professionalism and authenticity to the site. When I came to the home page I tried to make it basic enough so that the page didn't look intimidating to approach and easy to navigate but just enough to make it look unique and stand out from the crowd. I used two short paragraphs and two images in opposing positions to make the page look interesting to read with an image to accompany it so that the user can get an actual look at what the text was describing.

For the website I decided to go use sharp and cursive fonts throughout to portray the professional and upmarket style of the cafe. I used semi dark colors throughout the webpage such as brown and grey which I believed to make the webpage keep its professional feel. The website features a collapsible navigation bar which when reaching a resolution under 1024 x 1366 will collapse in to a neat and tidy drop down menu. I also included the use of the hover feature which helps the further clarify what navigation options they are hovering over. The webpage also features a newsletter sign up feature on the home page where the user can input their email address which when working will allow emails to be sent to the user containing promotional information.Also, on the reviews page underneath the pre-existing reviews there is a form section where the user can also fill in their details and leave a comment. When this feature has the appropriate back end support it would then upload that review to the list of reviews displayed on the page.

UX

This website is aimed mostly towards people in their mid twenties and above and also anyone who has dogs. This is comes from the website specifying that the coffee shop is perfect for dog owners and a large percentage of young people are not very fond of coffees. I tried to give off the impression that the site was designed for slightly older people with my color scheme and fonts which I believe would only stand out and appeal to those a little older and would seem too grown up for children.

The aim of the website is for the user to be able to get an insight to what the coffee shop has to offer and also to view what the coffee shop looks like using the few pictures on the screen and the location information specified in the footer. The aim of the home page is to be eye catching enough to draw in internet users and keep them there long enough so that they get a chance to have a look around and read what it's all about. For the menu page I tried to achieve a sophisticated and succinct page which very clearly highlights what each food or drink item is available with a supporting image for each. The images choices where quite specific because to further entice the user to carry on looking around and potentially visiting the coffee shop I had to pick images that really showed off each item and give the user a feeling like they had no choice but to go and try something.

I believe that my project is the best way to achieve these points because I have made the website in such a way that the target user is not too narrow meaning that the design and interface should be appealing and accessible to a very wide variety of people. I have also made it very clear in one of the opening paragraphs on the home page that dogs are welcome which should widen the different types of people that would be interested in visiting the cafe. I also believe that my project is perfect for the filling a gap for what people need this website for. It is very simple and easy to navigate and every aspect of the webpage is very clear and to the point leaving no chance of misinterpretation.

One example could be that a young couple would like to go out for a coffee one morning but there are either not many interesting coffee shops around or the ones that they have already tried are not up to their standard so they might be trying to look around to try and find something fresh nearby. They would then want to be able to visit the site and have a look at what food and drink is on offer and where the cafe is located. This could all be done with 1 click, all they would need to do is either scroll down on the home page for the location information and then click on the menu tab at the top of the screen which would lead them straight to the cafe menu which includes pictures and short description which will allow them to decided on whether they would like to visit or not. They would also be able to check out the latest reviews so that they can get some assurance that it really is a good place to go and get something to eat or drink.

Another scenario could be that an old couple that own a dog are wanting to go out for lunch but they can't leave the dog at home alone. Because the website is simple and easy to navigate they would have no problem being able to click on the website and read the second paragraph on the home page and they would see that they allow all dogs and also provide treats and water. They would then be able to choose if they would like to go and have their lunch there or not.

Before starting to make my project I drew up a small mock website on a piece of paper outlining what I would like to include on each page and how I would like it to work. This made the development process much easier as I had the design in front of me at all times and all I had to do was make it. I have attached pictures of the drawings as a PDF file in the directory.

Features

Newsletter sign up - This allows the user to sign up to a weekly newsletter containing promotional details and events by inputting their email address into the from.

Review submission - This allows the user to leave a review of the coffee shop by filling in the form including their email address, name and comment box.

Social media links - This allows the user to click on any of the social media icons located in the footer of the page. Doing so will have them redirected to another tab where they will arrive at that social media page.

Features Left to Implement

In the future I would like to add a Google maps feature where you can see exactly where the coffee shop is and how to get there all from within the website. This will make the user experience better ad they will no longer have the need to remember or copy the address down and paste it into another browser tab. Using the Google maps feature, I would also like to implement a store locator feature which will be useful when the coffee shop grows and there are multiple shops located around the country.

Another feature I would like to add is a language changer. This would be useful for anyone who does not speak or understand English. This could be controlled by a button or dropdown menu in the top corner which will allow the user to change the page language. I understand that when I choose to implement this feature I will need to know the language or use other resources to translate from one language to another accurately.

Technologies used

Bootstrap - I used https://getbootstrap.com/ in my project to create the jumbotron located on the home page and the form section that is located on the reviews page. I also used bootstrap for guidance on creating the navigation bar. I used bootstrap for these parts because it did the elements exactly how I wanted them and it eliminated the chance of error if I typed it up myself.

I used https://picresize.com/ so I could edit all of my images on the menu page to the exact same size so that the layout on the page would look uniform and professional. I used this size because it was a free and easy alternative to other paid editing software like photoshop.

Testing

Throughout the development process I was testing how my website was being effected by any alterations I made in my code such as positioning and sizes. I did this by running the website in a separate browser tab and using the inspect function. Through this function I was consistently playing around with different sizes, colors and layouts as I could make any changes I wanted without effecting the actually code. This enabled me to pick up on silly mistakes I made like some elements not being responsive on the smallest resolutions. I was also able to pre plan what colors and sizes I wanted to implement without wasting any time on a gamble whether it would work or not. Using the inspect function also reduced the chance for errors because I was already able to see the end result before I added it to the real code.

I also used a code validator website (https://validator.w3.org/) for both my CSS and HTML files throughout the development process. By using this website I was able to keep track of the code I was writing and any mistakes would be flagged up there and then which made rectifying them much easier as oppose to waiting until the end of my project then fixes every error I had made.

Another method of testing I used was sending my website out to other people. I sent the server port link out to a few of my family and friends and ask them to have a play around with the site including but not limited to the navigation features or forms I had. After they had a go with the site I then asked them to give me some feedback on what was good, what's was bad and what could be improved. For example, When I was near the end of my project I asked my girlfriend to have go at using my website and I asked her to get to different parts of the page. Navigating the site saw no issues at all as the navigation buttons were clear, easy to see and understand. The one bit of bad feedback I got was when I asked her to try and use the social links, All of the pages worked fine other than my reviews page which had two broken links on my Pinterest social link button. It would redirect the user to an error page and would not function as intended. So after taking this feedback onboard I went back and noticed that I had forgot to close the speech marks surrounding the web link. I also asked my girlfriend to try and use on of the input forms I had on the website and fill in some mock details. On both the home page and the reviews page the forms I had made functioned correctly and as intended. I also asked her to try and input unsuitable information or no information at all to see if the forms would not submit it and that also functioned is I wanted it to. I displayed a small box asking the user to input a valid email with a "@" symbol. Through testing this way I am 100% confident that these input boxes work correctly.

My website also adapts to different screen sizes and resolutions in a way that as the screen gets smaller the layout will change by shifting around the elements to hold a similar style while also being professional and functional. I have developed my website to be responsive as a whole in which I mean that as you switch resolutions to medium or small resolutions the whole page will stay very similar until you cross certain resolution checkpoints. For example, when viewing the menu page on any resolution above 574px the item cards will be in a 4 x 2 box layout however they will just get smaller as you reduce the screen size. However, when you go under 574px into mobile view the page then turns into a large scroll section where every item card covers the width of the screen and will continue to do so for the whole page. From what I have experience with other websites over the years and through the feedback I have been given this layout would work well with modern day internet styles. It makes each item easy to view and makes them all stand out due to them covering the entire width of the screen.

Another example of responsive design in my website is found on the home page. When I was testing the layout I wanted to make I noticed that when I went under 998px the two images of the coffee shop and a group of friends would shrink to such a point where they would look completely different and very unprofessional. I then decided that I would change the locations of the images once they reach that certain screen resolution. I chose to make it so when the resolution reaches 998px or less the two images would take up the whole width of the screen and the text support the image would then be pushed underneath for the first image and above for the second image. This just allows the webpage to still look good and still contain the images I wanted on the page.

One problem I encountered through testing was my original method for creating the menu page with all the items was to use a unordered list and then style the list in CSS to have 2 columns and no list style so that the bullet points would be removed. On the desktop version it worked however as soon as I tried to change the resolution around I found that the list would look strange and all of the text and images would overlap each other making a very unattractive page that did not display anything as I intended it to. I then decided to change the style from an unordered list to bootstrap cards. These worked perfectly for what I wanted and because they were responsive I had no problems with elements shrinking. 

Deployment

I deployed my work on to Github only as it is the only platform I am familiar with at this point in time however I am aware of the importance of possibly committing to more than once site to ensure that projects are not loft if there are issues with one of the services. I deployed my work to Git hub by opening a new terminal tab in Gitpod and started off with the "git init" to initiate a git repository. Then to add any files or images I used the "git add" command followed by the file name following the correct directory path. For example, to add my style.css file I had to follow the directory path through the folders and use "git add assets/CSS/style.css". Once I had added all of the files that I wanted to I would then use the "git commit" command followed by "-m "(comment)"" so I was able to keep track of what I had done and maybe leave a note saying what I needed to do next. I could then check what was in the staging area by using the "git status" command which would tell you what each file was doing such as being modified or any uncommitted files. The final step was to then use the "git push" command which you would usually need to use your sign in details for Github but because I was using Gitpod there was no need to. Once the committed files were pushed they were then deployed on to the Github site.

Media

The photos of coffees used on the menu page were obtained from https://unsplash.com/
The pictures of food also located on both the home page and the menu page were all sourced from Google images and then resized using https://picresize.com/

Acknowledgements

I received inspiration for this project from my sister who wanted to start up her own business running a coffee shop and it gave me the idea to make a website to help get her business out there and visible to web users. I also received a few pieces of inspiration from the tutor support team who would recommend alternative methods I could use in my project but without telling me which one to use and exactly how to use it.
